So we're coming to our final thing
that we're going to do with our data.
We've gone through the two to
three days of scanning data.
We've gone to the five to ten
minutes of cleaning up data,
the modeling that cleans up the data.
And we've been doing things
on this clean data and
we're seeing that these
programs are a little simpler.
And these turn out to be the hardest
thing that you're going to do.
And you tend to do
the cleaning data just once.
And so now we're going to look
at the last of these things.
And that is the thing that's
going to draw us a line.
And again we're going to use the d3, and
I've got some code already written that
does visualization, and
it reads the data gline.js.
Which has really sort of the legend and
all the points in here, and a legend at
the bottom, the x-axes, and again I
just borrowed this example from d3.
I looked at what the data format was
supposed to be like in their sample, and
then I said to myself,
how can I write a Python program
that's going to work with this stuff?
So, I wrote very little of this,
I just borrowed it from d3.js.
And then, all my cleverness is
getting to write that file.
So you'll see, when we get to
that program, that it creates,
it reads some data,
creates some memory structures, and
then dumps those memory structures
into this JavaScript data
in the exact format that
the d3 thing wants and
away we go with the easy visualization.
So let's take a look at the code
that we're going to be running here.
Let's just go with the gline.
It turns out that there
are two apps that do this.
One that shows you by years.
Let's just do it with years,
they're so similar.
I'll show you gyear first.
Okay, at this point, right, at this point,
we are going to be counting the senders
by top ten organizations and
sending over time.
So, we are going to open
a database connection,
we are going to write a little join.
This time we are interested
in the senders.
The first thing we're going to
do is figure out what those top
ten organizations are, okay?
And so we're just going to read
through all the senders, so
we're going through
the whole database once.
If your call list is well over 100
megabytes you'll see how fast this runs,
when it runs.
And all we're really doing,
we're not even looking for the people.
We're pulling out the sender's name.
And then we are splitting it, and
checking to see what the domain name is.
And then taking the organization and
counting then how many messages.
We're not worried about the dates or
times or anything.
For now, we're just interested in coming
up with the top ten organizations.
So now we're going to use sorted to get
the keys for the highest ten values.
And so this is all it takes in Python.
Give me back a, from the dictionary
sendorgs, give me a list of keys,
sorted by value, reverse equals true
means the highest one is first on down.
And I'm like I just want the top ten so
I just use a slicing operators,
orgs = orgs up to but not including ten,
so that's zero through nine.
And then I print that out,
print out the top ten organizations.
Let me go ahead and run that, and
you'll see just how quick that runs.
Python gyear, so I'm going to
read this whole database twice.
The first time is just to figure out
what the top ten organizations are.
So, that's how fast it was, and
this is the data down here,
but those are the top ten organizations.
So, that's how fast it came out, okay?
So, that reads the whole database in
like almost a blink of an eye.
And it should go fast on your computer,
even if you don't have
a super fast hard drive.
Okay, so now we're going to read again.
We know what the top ten organizations are,
and they live in this orgs,
and that way we can.
We're just going to use that
to filter data basically.
And so we're going to create two
dictionaries, one are the counts and
the next is a list of all the years.
And so then we're going to select
the messages and the sender and
when it was sent,
because we need the date.
And then we're joining all the stuff
up together with an on clause and
then we're going to loop through all the
records we get from that database query.
For message_row in cur,
well the sub one is who sent it.
The sub two is when it was sent.
And so we read through, and this pretty
much is the same as we did before.
We get the sender, we split it with
the at sign because we're looking for
the domain name to get pieces sub one, and
now this little bit of code right here
basically is our let's only keep the top ten.
So if the domain is not in those top
ten organizations that we computed
previously, skip it.
So now we've got a bit of
data that we want to get.
And so we're going to take the date and
if you look at the date it basically is
a year dash four-digit year dash two-digit
day month dash two-digit day.
And so
if message row two is the date, up to but
not including 4 is the first
4 characters of that date.
And so that's how we're getting
things like 2010 from things
that are like 2010-06-09,
for June 9, 2010.
And so that up to but
not including 4 is getting us that year.
And then we're going to make
a list of all the years, right?
And here we just want
all the years we've got.
You'll see when we produce the data,
we need this.
So if the year is not in the list years,
the year we're looking at, then append it.
This again is just one per year.
And then to gather the count
we're actually going to
have a key that's a tuple.
And we're, in a sense, taking each one of
these little data points and accumulating.
For each organization, year combination,
we've gotta separately accumulate data.
So we are going to have
a dictionary of counts
where the key is year comma domain name.
All right so if I,
let me just pop this data up here.
So each one of these,
each one of these is a count.
So for each year, we have one count for
every domain name.
So it's not just one histogram,
it's basically ten histograms.
The top ten organizations and
then a histogram for each year.
But we're using one dictionary and
a key that is organization comma year.
So organization is one part of that tuple,
and year is the other part of that tuple.
And that shows up right here.
The key is the year and the domain name,
the combination of the year and
the domain name.
And that, because it's a tuple,
can be used as the key in a dictionary.
And so then we're just
doing a simple calculation.
And then we have one more for
all of the domains.
We'll call that one total.
And so, it's another computation for
each year total and
this is the running total for
all the years.
And, again, that's just running all
that stuff. Then, we're done with that.
We've created totals for
each of those little spots, each of those,
it's like a grid of totals basically at
that point because we're kind of using
a tuple as the key.
We're sorting based on the year, so
that it goes up, the lowest year first,
because we might not,
it should be sorted that way.
Then we're going to print
out the counts of the years.
And that's printing this stuff out.
So, here is the counts.
And, somewhere,
there's lots of stuff in the counts.
That's the counts.
And if you look at each count,
the key is a tuple.
So that is the number of email
messages in 2012 from Berkeley.
And this is the number of email
messages, 449 is the number of
email messages in 2008 from unicon.net.
So by using this as the key in my
dictionary, I'm separately able to
accumulate each one of these histograms
for the year, organization combination.
And then I can just print
out the the years, that's so
that I can get the data to
come out the way I want.
And then, of course,
I have the organizations,
the top ten organizations,
in a list as well.
So I've got the organizations, this to
that, which is the y axis. Well, no.
It's counts is the Y axis, organizations is
the different lines that I'm going to do.
So let's just take a look at the data
we're going to produce at this point.
And it's called gline.js and
this is just an array of arrays.
The first array,
it's basically all the data.
This is the x value and all the y values.
X value, all the y values.
So this is the number of x's and
then the first one is just the legend
that basically is, what year it is.
This is the umich number, this is
the gmail numbers, etc., etc., etc.
We got all these sorted nicely so
they're going to come out nice.
And that's the data that we've gotta have,
that's the data we're going to produce so
let's take a look at the code
that produces that data.
You've got a construct,
I open the file for writing,
I print out the little gline equals,
the year.
Then I loop through and
print out all the organizations with
single quotes around each organization and
then I a thing and put a comma.
You know, in all these things
that you've gotta get right.
So, then what we do is we
have two nested loops.
First we're going to go
outer through the years.
The outer loop is year,
year, year, year, year.
And then the inner loop is
across all the organizations.
So we're going to loop through all
combinations of years and organizations.
Print the year out as
the first part of that,
which prints out this
little thing right there.
Then we're going to go through, and
go through all the organizations.
We have lists that are all the years and
all the organizations, so
we're looking at all the components.
All the possible combinations of orgs and
years.
We make a key, which is a tuple,
which is year, organization,
just like when we were accumulating
the data, and we do a retrieval.
Now you have to use a get, because
if we never, for a particular year,
we never saw a single message for that
organization, we have to assume it's zero.
So this key might not always exist,
this might not be every single grid
point might not be represented there.
And then we just print that out and then
print the slash at the end of the line.
And then cleverly print out when do I put
a comma out, when do I put a newline.
And literally at that point, I'm done.
I'm done and
it says I wrote the data to gline.js and
open gline.htm in a browser to view.
And so there we are, gline.htm is
in a browser, and we see our data.
So let me just show you briefly the other
version of this, which is gline.py.
It looks almost identical.
We figure out the top ten organizations.
It really comes down to here,
instead of going for the first four
characters, 2010 dash first four.
I'm going 2010 dash seven.
So this is really not the year
anymore it's the month.
So I'm accumulating now at every
month organization position.
The rest of this pretty much works.
I changed the word month to year,
but other than that,
it's pretty much the same code.
I write all this stuff out and
I write it to
gline.js, so I say, python gline.py.
Blink!
Like, again,
it just read a 100 megabytes of stuff,
just that fast because it's so
clever about that.
And if I take a look at the new gline.js.
Let's see if it's been
reloaded in my thing here.
So now it has month and so
you see each of these months.
And you also see that they're not dense.
So, well no, they are dense.
2006, so each month, month, month.
And again I sorted all these so
it comes out really pretty and
these are the different organizations and
the number of email messages in
each of those organizations.
And again that just is going to into I
just hit refresh now because it's going to
read the different JavaScript because
it overwrote that JavaScript.
And so if I do that, now I have
the data on a month-by-month basis for
these same things.
And if I just take a really quick
look to show you gline.htm,
again, I mostly took this from,
I load my data right there,
and then I took most of this stuff.
And I borrowed it from the d3
example on how to build lines, okay?
So, I think we've pretty much covered it.
It's a lot of steps, but by breaking
your data acquisition, data cleanup,
and data visualization into multiple
things, you can actually achieve things.
And the fun is that this is the real work,
this is the real curious work
where you're changing it, refreshing it,
changing it, refreshing it.
And this took one second.
This is three days.
This took one second.
That's how you use this multi-step
process to get to this thing so
that the part that you're
going to do a lot is fast.
And the part that's hard, and dangerous
and error prone, it can be restarted, okay?
So I hope you have fun with this
application and see you on the net.